Simplified Linear and RRF Retrievers Docs (#130559)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/retrievers.md

#### Parameters [linear-retriever-parameters]

::::{note}
Either `query` or `retrievers` must be specified.
Combining `query` and `retrievers` is not supported.
::::

`query` {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1`
:   (Optional, String)

    The query to use when using the [multi-field query format](#multi-field-query-format).

`fields` {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1`
:   (Optional, array of strings)

    The fields to query when using the [multi-field query format](#multi-field-query-format).
    Fields can include boost values using the `^` notation (e.g., `"field^2"`).
    If not specified, uses the index's default fields from the `index.query.default_field` index setting, which is `*` by default.

`normalizer` {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1`
:   (Optional, String)

    The normalizer to use when using the [multi-field query format](#multi-field-query-format).
    See [normalizers](#linear-retriever-normalizers) for supported values.
    Required when `query` is specified.

    ::::{warning}

>     Avoid using `none` as that will disable normalization and may bias the result set towards lexical matches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Avoid using `none` when performing hybrid search as that will disable normalization and may bias the result set towards lexical matches.
```

Reviewer: Should this warning go under the `Normalizers` section instead of params? Or be duplicated?

Reviewer: Ah nevermind, I see you have it down under the field boosting section, I think 3x might be overkill 😉 But we could consider moving it. I'll leave that up to you.

This is a great way to search an index, knowing little to nothing about its schema, while also handling normalization across lexical and semantic matches.

### Field grouping [multi-field-field-grouping]

The multi-field query format groups queried fields into two categories:

- **Lexical fields**: fields that support term queries, such as `keyword` and `text` fields.
- **Semantic fields**: [`semantic_text` fields](/reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/semantic-text.md).

Each field group is queried separately and the scores/ranks are normalized such that each contributes 50% to the final score/rank.
This is done to balance the importance of lexical and semantic fields.
Most indices contain more lexical than semantic fields, and without this grouping the results would often bias towards lexical field matches.

::::{warning}
In the `linear` retriever, this grouping relies on using a normalizer other than `none` (i.e., `minmax` or `l2_norm`).
If you use the `none` normalizer, the scores across field groups will not be normalized and the results may be biased towards lexical field matches.
::::

### Field boosting [multi-field-field-boosting]

::::{note}

> This section applies only to the `linear` retriever.

Reviewer: Change the header title and remove the note

::::

Fields can be boosted using the `^` notation:

```console
GET books/_search
{
  "retriever": {
    "linear": {
      "query": "elasticsearch",
      "fields": [
        "title^2.5",      <1>
        "description^2",  <2>
        "content"         <3>
      ],
      "normalizer": "minmax"
    }
  }
}
```

1. 2.5x weight
2. 2x weight
3. 1x weight (default)

Due to how the [field group scores](#multi-field-field-grouping) are normalized, per-field boosts have no effect on the magnitude of the final score.
Instead, they affect the importance of the field's score within its group.
For example, if the schema looks like:

```console
PUT /books
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "title": {
        "type": "semantic_text"
      },
      "description": {
        "type": "text"
      },
      "content": {
        "type": "text"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Boosting `description` by 2 will cause 2/3 of the lexical fields group score to be derived from `description` field matches.

Reviewer: Yes, that's what I'm looking for, a specific example of how that would work that users can follow.

### Wildcard field patterns

Field names support the `*` wildcard character to match multiple fields:

```console
GET books/_search
{
  "retriever": {
    "rrf": {
      "query": "machine learning",
      "fields": [
        "title*",    <1>
        "*_text"     <2>
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

1. Match fields that start with `title`
2. Match fields that end with `_text`

Note, however, that wildcard field patterns will only resolve to fields that either:

- Support term queries, such as `keyword` and `text` fields
- Are `semantic_text` fields

### Limitations

- **Single index**: Multi-field queries currently work with single index searches only
- **CCS (Cross Cluster Search)**: Multi-field queries do not support remote cluster searches

### Examples

> - [RRF with the multi-field query format](docs-content://solutions/search/retrievers-examples.md#retrievers-examples-rrf-multi-field-query-format)

Author: Where?

}
```

## Multi-field query format [multi-field-query-format]
```yaml {applies_to}
stack: ga 9.1
```

The `linear` and `rrf` retrievers support a multi-field query format that provides a simplified way to define searches across multiple fields without explicitly specifying inner retrievers.
This format automatically generates appropriate inner retrievers based on the field types and query parameters.
This is a great way to search an index, knowing little to nothing about its schema, while also handling normalization across lexical and semantic matches.

### Field grouping [multi-field-field-grouping]

The multi-field query format groups queried fields into two categories:

- **Lexical fields**: fields that support term queries, such as `keyword` and `text` fields.
- **Semantic fields**: [`semantic_text` fields](/reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/semantic-text.md).

Each field group is queried separately and the scores/ranks are normalized such that each contributes 50% to the final score/rank.

> This is done to balance the importance of lexical and semantic fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This balances the importance of lexical and semantic fields.
```

        "description^2",          <2>
        "title_semantic",         <3>
        "description_semantic^2"
      ],
      "normalizer": "minmax"
    }
  }
}
```

1. 3x weight
2. 2x weight
3. 1x weight (default)

Due to how the [field group scores](#multi-field-field-grouping) are normalized, per-field boosts have no effect on the range of the final score.
Instead, they affect the importance of the field's score within its group.

For example, if the schema looks like:

```console
PUT /books
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "title": {
        "type": "text",
        "copy_to": "title_semantic"
      },
      "description": {
        "type": "text",
        "copy_to": "description_semantic"
      },
      "title_semantic": {
        "type": "semantic_text"
      },
      "description_semantic": {
        "type": "semantic_text"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

And we run this query:

```console
GET books/_search
{
  "retriever": {
    "linear": {
      "query": "elasticsearch",
      "fields": [
        "title",
        "description",
        "title_semantic",
        "description_semantic"
      ],
      "normalizer": "minmax"
    }
  }
}
```

The score breakdown would be:

> * Lexical fields (50% of score):

Reviewer: Nice!
